ASSEMBLY INSTRUCTIONS
& USER’S MANUAL
Analog Synthesizer / Moogfest 2014 Kit
IMPORTANT SAFETY INSTRUCTIONS
WARNING - WHEN USING ELECTRIC PRODUCTS, THESE BASIC
PRECAUTIONS SHOULD ALWAYS BE FOLLOWED.
1. Read these instructions.
2. Keep these instructions.
3. Heed all warnings
4. Follow all instructions
5. Do not use apparatus near water - for example, but not limited to: near
a bathtub, washbowl, kitchen sink, in a wet basement, or near a swim
ming pool or the like.
6. Clean only with dry cloth.
7. Do not block any ventilation openings. Install in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions.
8. Do not install near any heat sources such as radiators, heat registers,
   stoves or other apparatus (including amplifiers) that produce heat. Do
not operate this apparatus with the case in direct sunlight.
9. Protect the power cord from being walked on or pinched particularly at
plugs, convenience receptacles, and the point where they exit from
the apparatus.
10. Use attachments/accessories specified by the manufacturer. Ensure
that any external equipment used in conjunction with this product
   is installed according to the safety specifications supplied with
that equipment.
11. Unplug this apparatus during lightning storms or when unused for a
long period of time.
12.   This product, in combination with an amplifier and headphones or
speakers, may be capable of producing sound levels that could cause
permanent hearing loss. Do not operate for a long period of time
at a high volume level or at a level that is uncomfortable.
13. The product should only be connected to the AC adapter supplied with
the product. Do not connect the AC adapter to an Mains AC socket-
   outlet that is outside the adapter’s input specifications.
14. Care should be taken so that objects do not fall and liquids are not
spilled into the enclosure through openings. Do not expose this product
to rain or moisture.
15.   Refer all servicing to qualified service personnel. Servicing is required
when the apparatus has been damaged in any way, such as if power
supply cord or plug is damaged, liquid has been spilled or objects have
fallen into the apparatus, the apparatus has been exposed to rain or
moisture, does not operate normally, or has been dropped.
NOTE:
This equipment has been tested and found to comply with the limits for a
Class B digital device, pursuant to part 15 of the FCC Rules. These limits are
designed to provide reasonable protection against harmful interference in
a residential installation. This equipment generates, uses and can radiate
radio frequency energy and, if not installed and used in accordance with
the instructions, may cause harmful interference to radio communications.
However, there is no guarantee that interference will not occur in a particular
installation. If this equipment does cause harmful interference to radio
or television reception, which can be determined by turning the equipment
off and on, the user is encouraged to try to correct the interference by one
or more of the following measures:
—Reorient or relocate the receiving antenna.
—Increase the separation between the equipment and receiver.
—Connect the equipment into an outlet on a circuit different from
 that to which the receiver is connected.
—Consult the dealer or an experienced radio/TV technician for help.
CAUTION: Please note that any changes or modifications made to this
product not expressly approved by Moog Music Inc. could void the user’s
authority granted by the FCC to operate the equipment.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION 6
ANALOG SYNTHESIZER BASICS 7
ASSEMBLY
Parts List 8
Instructions 9
WERKSTATT FEATURES AND CONTROLS
   Default Settings  12
Voltage Controlled Oscillator 13
Voltage Controlled Filter 14
   Voltage Controlled Amplifier  14
Oscillator Modulation 15
Filter Modulation 16
Low Frequency Oscillator 17
   Envelope Generator  18
Keyboard 19
Patchable Header 20
Rear Panel 21
ABOVE AND BEYOND
Interfacing with Other Synthesizers and Effects  21
Hacking & Circuit Bending 23
SPECIFICATIONS 24

5
WERKSTATT-Ø1
The Moog Werkstatt-Ø1 is a patchable,
100% analog synthesizer whose design
is based on classic Moog circuits.
Assembly is extremely simple: Any
user can quickly build this analog
synthesizer with minimal tools
and expertise. Through assembly
and inspired investigation, the
Werkstatt-Ø1 is an excellent platform
for exploring the world of analog
synthesizer circuits. A lifetime of
experimentation, knob twisting, and
sound design awaits.
7
ANALOG SYNTHESIZER BASICS
An analog synthesizer generates two types of signals: Audio Signals and
Control Signals. Audio signals are the sounds you hear emanating from the
sound creation circuits of an instrument. Control signals, on the other hand,
are used to change and/or modify the settings of these circuits. Due to the
analog nature of the instrument, these Control signals carry a continuously
variable voltage level. These signals are referred to as Control Voltages,
and most analog synthesizer components are “Voltage Controlled.” An
additional type of control signal is known as a Gate, or Trigger, which is
simply used to initiate an event. Changing Pitch or frequency is an example
of using a Control Voltage; playing a key on a keyboard is an example of
generating a Gate signal.
In an analog synthesizer, each set of circuits performs a particular job. The
oscillators, filters, and envelopes, etc. are each self-contained modules.
By design, these modules are wired together using both audio signals and
control signals. However, patch points and patch cables can allow these
modules to be reconnected in new ways. This is the basis for the term
Modular Synthesizer. The first Moog synthesizers were modular synthesizers.
In this diagram of the Werkstatt modules, the solid lines represent audio
signals, and the dotted lines represent control signals. The definitions and
functions of each module are described in the Werkstatt Features and
Controls section.
8
ASSEMBLY
Putting together your Werkstatt is easy. No soldering is required, and all of
the electronic components have been pre-assembled. The only tools you
will need are a #1 Phillips [ + ] screwdriver, and a good pair of scissors. And
while assembly is not complicated, it is important to follow each step, in
order. Be mindful that you are working with electronics, so a good measure
of caution and care is always in order.
A NOTE ABOUT ELECTROSTATIC DISCHARGE:
You may have noticed that little electric shock you sometimes receive
when you touch something like a metal doorknob. This is called electrostatic
discharge, and it can be harmful to electronic components. To
protect the circuitry when you are assembling your Werkstatt, leave the
circuit board in its protective anti-static sleeve until you are ready to install
it. Also, take a moment to ground yourself by touching a metal surface or
grounded object before you handle the circuit board.
PARTS LIST
Unpack your Werkstatt synthesizer kit and make sure all parts are present
and accounted for before you get started.
A)   Werkstatt-Ø1 Printed Circuit Board (PCB)  x 1
B)   Bottom Chassis (metal)  x 1
C)   Top Panel with silkscreened printing (metal)  x 1
D)   12 Volt DC power adapter  x 1
E)   Hardware Kit containing:
   a)    Keyboard button caps  x 13
   b)    1/4” Sheet metal screws (Black)   x 4
   c)    1/4” Pan head machine screws (Silver)   x 5
   d)    Black nylon washer  x 1
   e)    Black nylon hex nut   X 1
   f)    Rubber feet   x 4
   g)  Patchable Header cables   x 5
F)   Serial Number label   x 1
9
INSTRUCTIONS
1) ATTACHING THE FEET
Attach the four rubber
feet by pushing them into
the holes of the Bottom
Chassis and twisting.
The black nylon washer is
used as a spacer between
the audio jack and the
inside of the Bottom
Chassis. You will need to
cut a 1/16” section from
the washer.
2) TRIMMING THE NYLON WASHER
10
3) INSTALLING THE ELECTRONICS
A) Carefully remove the Printed Circuit Board from the protective sleeve.
Take the washer you prepared in the previous step and slide it onto the
audio output jack, lining up the missing section with the metal tab on
the jack.
B) Place the Printed Circuit Board into the Bottom Chassis. Slide the audio
jack through the jack hole, and be sure the five mounting holes in the
Printed Circuit Board line up with the standoffs on the Bottom Chassis.
   Using the silver pan head machine screws (x5), loosely attach the Printed
Circuit Board to the chassis. Take a moment to make sure everything is
lined up neatly and correctly—including the power input jack—and then
go ahead and tighten the screws.
Finally, place the black nylon hex nut on the audio jack, and hand-tighten
the nut to hold the jack securely to the Bottom Chassis.
A. B.
11
4) POWER / LED TEST
Using only the included
power supply, connect the
barrel end to the power supply
input of your Werkstatt;
connect the other end to
an AC wall outlet (100-240
Volts AC / 50-60 Hz). At this
point, the red LED on the
front panel (LFO) should
begin blinking. If it does,
you’re ready to move on.
NOTE: Unplug the power
supply from the Werkstatt
before proceeding.
YOUR WERKSTATT IS NOW COMPLETE.
Place the 13 button caps on
the keyboard buttons.
Place the Top Panel in
position so that all of the
knobs, switches, and keyboard
buttons pass through
the corresponding holes.
Secure the Top Panel using
the four (x4) black sheet
metal screws. The screw
holes in the Top Panel
should line up with the screw
holes in the Bottom Chassis.
NOTE: Tightening these
screws may require a little
extra effort the first time,
as these screws must cut
threads into the metal holes.
5) ATTACHING KEYBOARD BUTTONS
6) ADDING THE TOP PANEL
12
FEATURES AND CONTROLS
The Werkstatt is a monophonic (one note a time) analog synthesizer, and as
with many analog synthesizers, the Werkstatt is modular in nature. While there
are many hard-wired connections that allow the Werkstatt to be used as-is, the
addition of a Patchable Header allows the freedom to connect the modules in
new and creative ways.
DEFAULT SETTINGS
Carefully set all of the controls to the default positions shown below. This will
provide a great starting point for exploring the functions and features of the
Werkstatt-Ø1 Analog Synthesizer.
13
VCO (VOLTAGE CONTROLLED OSCILLATOR)
The Oscillator is the primary sound generating component of an analog synthesizer.
Based on the same circuitry as the Minimoog Voyager and Little Phatty,
the Werkstatt oscillator produces a raw waveform that is rich in harmonics.
While the keyboard determines the note being played, the frequency knob
determines the pitch of that note.
FREQ (FREQUENCY KNOB)
The Frequency knob offers a wide pitch range, extending over nine octaves.
Keep in mind, the pitch is also controlled via the keyboard, and can be modified
by other control signals. Depending on your monitoring system—and your
ears—the outer ranges of the FREQ knob may appear to be inaudible.
WAVE (WAVEFORM SWITCH)
Two waveform options are available on the Werkstatt. Each waveform, or waveshape,
carries a distinct harmonic content, creating a different sonic signature,
known as timbre.
SAW: Short for Sawtooth, the Saw wave looks similar to the cutting edge of
a saw blade. The Saw wave contains both even and odd numbered harmonics,
and creates a bright and buzzy sound before filtering. The strength—or
level—of each harmonic is the reciprocal of its number in the harmonic series.
PULSE: This waveform is unique in that it only contains the odd numbered
harmonics. The ratio that controls the relative volume of these harmonics
is determined by the Pulse Width. The width of the pulse can be anything
from a wide rectangle to a square to a very narrow rectangle. The thinner
the wave, the more the upper harmonics are accentuated.
PWM (PULSE WIDTH MODULATION)
When the Pulse waveform is selected, the Pulse Width Modulation knob can be
used to determine the shape of the Pulse, thereby changing the timbre of the
wave. With the knob set just a little left of center, the wave will be square, with
a 50% duty cycle. The duty cycle is commonly thought of as the positive portion
of the wave. The range of this knob can create a narrow pulse wave with
a duty-cycle of almost zero, all the way up to a wide rectangular wave having
about a 95% duty-cycle.
NOTE: This knob will not function when the VCO MOD DEST switch is set to
PWM. In this case, the Pulse Width will be controlled by the VCO MOD SOURCE.
The keyboard determines the note
played based on the setting of the
Freq control - these two control inputs
are summed together.
14
VCF (VOLTAGE CONTROLLED FILTER)
VCA (VOLTAGE CONTROLLED AMPLIFIER)
CUTOFF (CUTOFF FREQUENCY KNOB)
The Cutoff knob specifies the frequency where the Filter is applied. Turning
the knob to the right will open the filter, allowing more harmonic content to be
heard, creating a brighter sound. Turning the knob to the left will close the filter,
causing more harmonic content to be filtered, creating a darker sound.
RES (RESONANCE KNOB)
Directing the output of the filter back to the input allows the Moog filter to
create a harmonic boost at the cutoff frequency. The amount of this boost, or
emphasis, is controlled by the Resonance knob. By increasing the Resonance
and decreasing the cutoff, the Werkstatt filter can be made to self-oscillate,
creating a sine wave that can be used as second audio sound source.
MODE (MODE SWITCH)
The VCA can function in one of two ways, controlled by the Mode switch.
ON: In this position, the VCA is always on, and the audio signal of the
Werkstatt is output continuously, all the time. This setting is great for when
you are creating synthesizer sounds and effects that need to play for an
extended period, or droning sounds.
EG: EG is short for Envelope Generator. When the switch is in this position,
the VCA is controlled by the Attack, Sustain, and Decay characteristics of
the Envelope Generator Module.
The Werkstatt uses the classic 24dB per
octave Moog Ladder filter. This low-pass
Voltage Controlled Filter (VCF) selectively
shapes the timbre of the sound created
by the oscillator, by attenuating and/or
emphasizing certain harmonic elements.
This section controls the output level of the
Werkstatt. As you may have noticed, there is
no Volume knob on the Werkstatt. The VCA
boosts the final audio signal to a suitable level.
15
VCO MOD (MODULATION OF THE VOLTAGE CONTROLLED OSCILLATOR)
SOURCE (SOURCE SWITCH)
This switch allows you to choose which Modulation Source will be applied to
the Oscillator.
EG: EG is short for Envelope Generator. When the switch is in this position,
the Attack, Sustain, and Decay characteristics of the Envelope Generator
will be used as the modulation source.
LFO: LFO is short for Low Frequency Oscillator. The LFO produces a cyclic
change that can be used to create a repeating effect. When the switch is in
this position, the LFO will be used as the modulation source.
AMOUNT (AMOUNT KNOB)
Once a modulation source has been selected, the Amount knob can be used to
control the depth of the modulation effect.
DEST (DESTINATION SWITCH)
This switch allows you to choose which control will be affected by the chosen
Modulation Source.
PWM: When the switch is in this position, the Modulation source will be used
to continually vary the width of the Pulse wave. The VCO Wave switch must
be set to Pulse.
NOTE: Placing the switch in the PWM position will override the Pulse Width
Modulation (PWM) knob in the VCO section.
FREQ: When the switch is in this position, the Modulation source will be
used to continually vary the pitch of the Oscillator. This can be used to create
a gentle vibrato or wild swoops in pitch, all depending on the Amount
Knob and the setting of the LFO Rate knob (or EG).
Modulation is a way of introducing subtle or drastic changes to a sound—or
anything in between. In order to use modulation effectively, you will need to
select a modulation source, choose a destination, and control the depth of
the effect.
16
VCF MOD (MODULATION OF THE VOLTAGE CONTROLLED FILTER)
SOURCE (SOURCE SWITCH)
This switch allows you to choose which Modulation Source will be applied to
the filter.
EG: EG is short for Envelope Generator. When the switch is in this position,
the Attack, Sustain, and Decay characteristics of the Envelope Generator
will be used as the modulation source.
LFO: LFO is short for Low Frequency Oscillator. The LFO produces a cyclic
change that can be used to create a repeating effect. When the switch is in
this position, the LFO will be used as the modulation source.
AMOUNT (AMOUNT KNOB)
Once a modulation source has been selected, the Amount knob can be used to
control the depth of the modulation effect.
POLARITY (POLARITY SWITCH)
The Polarity of the VCF modulation source can be reversed. That is, the normally
negative portions will become positive, and vice-versa. For example,
instead of using the Attack portion of the EG to boost the Filter Cutoff frequency,
inverting the polarity will allow the Attack portion to lower the Filter Cutoff
Frequency. Just be aware that if the Cutoff is already set low, inverting the EG
polarity might close the Filter too far, making it appear as if the Werkstatt is not
creating any sound.
[ + ]:   Positive is the normal polarity for the VCF Modulation Source.
[ – ]:   The negative position reverses the VCF Modulation Source.
Filter Modulation changes the value of the Filter’s Cutoff Frequency. Either
the EG or the LFO can be used as a Filter modulation source. When the EG is
chosen as the modulation source, the polarity of the EG can be reversed for
even greater sound creation options.
17
LFO MOD (LOW FREQUENCY OSCILLATOR)
RATE (RATE KNOB)
The speed, or frequency, of the LFO is controlled via this knob. The red LED will
flash once for every wave cycle, providing visual feedback of the LFO speed.
WAVE (WAVE SWITCH)
This switch allows you to select the Waveform of the LFO.
SQUARE: When the Square wave is selected, the LFO will alternate between
two distinct values representing the upper and lower limits of the wave.
Some good examples of Square wave modulation are the emulation of an
acoustic instrument playing a trill, or many vintage video game sounds.
TRIANGLE: The Triangle wave creates a continuously changing value that
sweeps between the upper and lower limits of the wave. Vibrato is a good
example of Triangle wave modulation.
The Low Frequency Oscillator creates a consistent modulation source that can
be used to add a repeating, cyclical change to any of the modulation sources.
It can be used to modulate the Filter Cutoff Frequency, the Pitch of the Oscillator,
or the Width of a Pulse wave. Using the Patchable Header, you can also
use the LFO to modulate other parameters, such as the VCA output level. The
Werkstatt LFO has an upper frequency of around 600 Hz—well within the
audio range. This ability allows the LFO to create rich and unusual sounds when
modulating the Oscillator pitch or other destinations.
18
ENVELOPE (ENVELOPE GENERATOR)
SUSTAIN (SUSTAIN SWITCH)
In a simple sense, the Sustain switch allows you to choose either a piano-like
behavior, or something more like an organ, by activating the Sustain segment
of the Envelope Generator.
ON:   When the Sustain switch is set to On, the Envelope will continue to
sustain as long as the keyboard key is being played. In this mode, the Werkstatt
behaves more like an organ.
OFF: The Off position bypasses the sustain segment of the envelope generator.
The Envelope will advance directly from the Attack stage to the Decay
stage. In this mode, the Werkstatt creates more of a plucked sound, like
a piano.
NOTE: With the SUSTAIN switch in the OFF position, the attack must be very
short or the EG will not produce an output.
ATTACK (ATTACK KNOB)
The time it takes for the Envelope Generator to reach its maximum level is
known as the Attack time. For a fast Attack, turn this knob counter-clockwise.
For a slower Attack, increase the value by turning the knob clockwise.
NOTE: Keep this knob turned down when the SUSTAIN switch in the OFF position,
or the EG will not produce an output.
DECAY (DECAY KNOB)
The time it takes for the Envelope Generator to reach its lowest level after the
key is released, or after the attack segment is complete is known as the Decay
time. For a fast Decay, turn this knob counter-clockwise. For a slower Decay,
increase the value by turning the knob clockwise.
Each time a key is pressed or a trigger received, the Envelope Generator can
produce a series of control voltages that allow you to change the value of certain
parameters over time. The Attack, Sustain, and Decay parameters combine
to create an Envelope shape that can be chosen as a modulation source.
19
KBD (KEYBOARD)
This diagram shows how the “button” keyboard of the Werkstatt (above) relates
to a standard piano keyboard. Although the note names shown are correct
for this layout, the actual note being produced will also depend on many
factors, including the VCO FREQ knob, etc...
The Werkstatt is equipped with a one-octave, C to C keyboard. The keyboard
features round buttons as opposed to traditional keys, but the layout is the
same. The keyboard operates with a low note priority; if more than one note is
played at the same time, the lowest note will sound.
D
C #
E
D #
G
F #
A
G #
B
A #
KEYBOARD OCTAVE SCALING
Play the lowest note [ C ] on the keyboard; now
play the highest note [ C1 ]. The interval you hear
between these notes should be one octave. If
you have an electronic guitar tuner, you can use
it to verify the notes being played. If the interval
is not one octave, there is a Variable Resistor
trimmer [ VR10 ] on the Printed Circuit Board labeled
KB TRIM that can be adjusted to fine-tune
the keyboard octave setting.
GLIDE (GLIDE KNOB)
To achieve a smooth pitch transition from one note to another, increase the
Glide amount. Turning the knob clockwise increases the amount of time required
to glide from one note to another. Turning the knob counter-clockwise
will cancel the glide effect.
+5VTP18
TP19 VR10
R70
Q9
C53
U13
C58 C56
U14
C60 R82 C61
KB TRIM
20
PATCH (PATCHABLE HEADER)
Unlike fully modular analog synthesizers that have
patch points on every module, the Werkstatt has
gathered these inputs and outputs into a single
compact Patchable Header.
The physical format is different, but the function is
the same. The Patchable Header allows control signals
generated by the Werkstatt to be easily routed
to the control inputs of the VCO, VCF, VCA, and
LFO, vastly expanding the sound creation possibilities
of the synthesizer. The five patch wires included
with the Werkstatt are designed to make the most
of these patch points. In addition to control signal
inputs, the Patchable Header also features an audio
input that feeds directly into the Filter.
BEST PRACTICES
In general, the Werkstatt is designed so there are
no “illegal” patches, though not all make musical
sense. In experimenting with the Patchable
Header, there are some ground rules/best
practices that apply.
It is common to create a “Y” connection at a CV out point and drive two
separate inputs. Many of the Werkstatt’s outputs already have two connections.
However, it is best to avoid mixing two Control signals by creating a
“Y” connection at a CV input, as adding these voltages together can possibly
exceed the capabilities of the input.
You should also avoid patching an output to an output; this is another version
of passive voltage summing that can lead to unpredictable results. Patching
an input to an input is not likely to result in any useful response.
Note that there are control outputs for both the VCO and VCF signals. Technically,
these are audio outputs; these audio outputs can serve double duty
as control signals. For example, the VCO output can be used for audio rate
modulation, or it can go down to 8 Hz—low enough to use as a LFO.
PATCHING WITH OTHER ANALOG INSTRUMENTS
The Patchable Header was not designed to connect with external CV gear,
but it is possible. For more information and cautions, please refer to the Interfacing
with Other Synthesizers and Effects section of this manual.
21
REAR PANEL
The Werkstatt’s rear panel features two connection points; one audio output,
and one power jack.
AUDIO OUTPUT
The Werkstatt’s single audio output features a 1/4” unbalanced (TS) jack.
POWER INPUT
Use only the DC power supply that was provided to power your Werkstatt.
Plug the connector end into the Werkstatt, and plug the other end into a
compatible wall outlet.
ABOVE AND BEYOND
For some, the Werkstatt is simply a starting point for exploring new
sonic possibilities. It is possible to modify the internal circuitry, and to
interface with other music-making devices. Here are a few guidelines to get
you started.
INTERFACING WITH OTHER SYNTHESIZERS AND EFFECTS
COMMON GROUND
The Patchable Header wasn’t specifically designed to connect with
external CV gear, but it is possible to do so. If a CV connection between
an external piece of CV gear and the Werkstatt is desired, the
two devices must share a common ground connection or the external
control will not work. The simplest way to achieve this is to plug the two
devices into the same audio mixer. Both devices will have ground at the
sleeve of their audio jacks. Make this audio / ground connection before
connecting the units together.
USE CAUTION
Patching to external CV and Audio sources can subject the Werkstatt
to voltages and currents that are beyond what it was designed to
withstand. Caution should be exercised when selecting gear that will
connect to the Werkstatt. Verify that the equipment used to provide a
common ground connection is not faulty. Refer to the Specifications
section for acceptable voltages.
CALIBRATING THE WERKSTATT FOR 1 VOLT PER OCTAVE
The VCO EXP IN connection point on the Patchable Header can be set
to receive 1 Volt per Octave control signals. This calibration is performed
using the Variable Resistor trim pot [ VR5 ] labelled VCO EXP
TRIM. It is located on the Printed Circuit Board, below and to the right
of the VCO Pitch potentiometer.
22
To calibrate, play the lowest note on the keyboard, and set the VCO FREQ
knob to the center position. Send a 0V signal to the VCO EXP IN patch
point and measure the frequency of the VCO. You can use an instrument
tuner for this function. Next, send a +3V signal to the VCO EXP IN patch
point. Adjust VR5 to eight times the first frequency measurement (this
equals 3 Octaves). Repeat this process to verify calibration accuracy.
Note that on the Patchable
Header, the KB CV is output
as about 0.3 Volts/semitone,
which is equivalent
to about 3.6 Volts/Octave.
This allows the use of the
Keyboard as a wider range
controller than if it were
output as 1 Volt/Octave.
CREATING CABLES
For internal patching use the included Patchable Header cables. If you
want to patch the Werkstatt to external gear, you may want to convert
the included patch cables so they can plug into the 1/4” (3.5mm) patch
points on the other products. One simple technique is to take a 1/4” TS
patch cable and cut it in half to make two half cables. Now take one of the
Werkstatt patch cables and cut it in half as well. Since the ground is being
provided by the audio output, you would only need to splice and solder
the inner conductors of the two half-cables together, and then insulate
the splice with electrical tape or heat-shrink tubing.
MUSIC INC
VCO EXP TRIM
VCO
VR1
VCO PITCH
SW1 VCO WAVE
PULSE
SAW
TP10
TP8
C14
JMP56
R23
R37 C27
C30
R40 R47
TP14
R39R43
R46
VR5
VCO MOD
SW3
VCO MOD SRC
U4
23
STUDYING THE WERKSTATT’S ANALOG CIRCUITS
The Werkstatt circuitry was designed to invite exploration and study of its analog
circuits. The complete schematic for the Werkstatt Printed Circuit Board can be
downloaded from the Moog Music Website: www.moogmusic.com/werkstatt.
Test Points, Jumpers, and a mini 16 x 6 Experimenter’s pad are provided on
the Werkstatt Printed Circuit Board. Although the Printed Circuit Board was
created using Surface Mount Design, these features use plated through-hole
construction to make measuring and experimenting easier.
TEST POINTS (TP)
Plated through-hole test points are provided, allowing the ability to breakout
the most important signals. In some cases, Test points have been added to control
nodes for studying the behavior of the outputs of the circuits.
JUMPERS (JMP)
Plated through-hole jumpers exist for certain Audio Signal and Control Signals.
Jumpers also exist for the unused Integrated Circuit pins (IC Gates) in order to
terminate the unused inputs.
EXPERIMENTER’S BREADBOARD PADS
This is 16 x 6 grid of unconnected through-hole pads provides an area for
bread-boarding new circuit designs. On the schematic these appear as a group
of unconnected jumpers.
Warranty Warning
Hacking or Modifying your Werkstatt in any way will naturally void your warranty,
as Moog Music cannot warrant parts and labor outside the original
configuration of the product.
In addition, please note that any changes or modifications made to this product
could void the user’s authority granted by the FCC to operate the equipment.
Moog Music Inc. does not recommend the modification of this product.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
A
B
C
D
E
F JMP9
JMP18
JMP27
JMP36
JMP45
WERKSTATT SYNTH P/N BRD -10-011 - 1111
REVA - 02/24/14 SD
© Moog Music Inc. 2014
VCA
VR2 PULSE WIDTH VR3 VCF CUTOFF VCF VR4 VCF RES
AUDIO OUT
SW2
VCA MODE
TP5
TP3
TP7
R16
R6
R4 R5 R7
R8
R9
R13
R15
R18
R22
R21
JMP46
JMP55
C10
10
12
U3 TP4
R14
R19
R25
R20
EXPERIMENTER’S PADS
C11
U2
C15
24
SCHEMATIC DOWNLOAD AGREEMENT
BY DOWNLOADING THE WERKSTATT SCHEMATIC, YOU ARE AGREEING TO
THE FOLLOWING TERMS:
1. All copyrights to the circuit diagrams for the Werkstatt are the property
   of MOOG MUSIC INC. Copying this content in part or in whole without the
permission of the copyright owner is forbidden by copyright law. How
ever, you are permitted to make a single copy for personal non-commercial
purposes.
2. You are expressly forbidden to engage in commercial activities such as
selling the circuit diagram materials that you have copied in part or
in whole.
3. The circuit diagrams are provided for customers who have purchased the
product, and the reader is assumed to be a user of the product. Please
   be aware that in some cases, MOOG MUSIC INC., its authorized dealers,
and distributors may be unable to respond to inquiries regarding pub
lished circuit diagram materials from people who have not purchased
the product.
4.  Specifications and electronic circuits of products are subject to change
without notice.
5. MOOG MUSIC INC. does not recommend modification of its products.
6. Please be aware that modifying any Moog Music product will void
the warranty.
7. MOOG MUSIC INC., its authorized dealers, and the distributors shall bear
   no liability for any damages (loss of business profits or data, financial loss,
   or impairment of health) resulting from your use of these circuit diagrams.
   This limitation of liability shall apply even if MOOG MUSIC INC., its
   authorized dealers, and the distributors had been informed beforehand of
the possibility of such damages.
8. Please be aware that this downloading service may be terminated or
modified without notice.
SPECIFICATIONS
All Specifications subject to change without notice.
SOUND SOURCE:
VCO - VOLTAGE CONTROLLED OSCILLATOR
Range:     0 to +5 Volt Signal; 8Hz ~ 16KHz from KB
 and VCO Freq Control
Controllers:
Waveform Switch:   Saw or Pulse
PWM Knob: Pulse Width Modulation
FREQ Knob:   Sweeps VCO over 8 Octaves
Control Inputs:
 KB CV: 1 Octave; with Glide
 VCO MOD: Selectable LFO/ EG Switch; Assignable
 Pitch or PWM
VCO EXP IN:  Exponential FM Input – 1 Volt/Octave
 nominal, trimmable via VR 5
VCO LIN IN: Linear FM Input - this is an inverted input (incr-
     ease in voltage applied lowers the frequency)
Control Outputs:
VCO CV: Control Voltage / Audio Output

SOUND MODIFIERS:
VCF - VOLTAGE CONTROLLED FILTER
Type: 4-pole (24 dB/Octave), Ladder; self-oscillating
     low-pass filter with resonance
Controllers:
CUTOFF knob:   Selectable LFO/ EG Switch; Polarity Switch
VCF IN: Filter Cutoff Input
Control Inputs:
VCF MOD: Selectable LFO/ EG Switch; Polarity Switch
VCF IN: Filter Cutoff Input
Control Outputs:
VCF Output: + 2 Volt Signal usable as CV or Sound Source
VCA - VOLTAGE CONTROLLED AMPLIFIER
Controllers:
MODE switch:   EG / ON
Control Inputs:
VCA IN: Control Voltage Input
MODULATION SOURCES:
LFO - LOW FREQUENCY OSCILLATOR
Range: + 2.5 Volt
Controllers:
RATE knob:   Modulation Frequency (.2 Hz ~ 600 Hz)
WAVE switch:   Triangle / Square
Control Inputs:
 LFO IN: LFO Rate Control Voltage
Control Outputs:
LFO OUT: LFO Rate Control Voltage

EG - ENVELOPE GENERATOR
Range: 0 to +5 Volt
Controllers:
ATTACK knob: Attack Time
DECAY knob: Decay Time
SUSTAIN switch:  Sustain Level ON / OFF
Control Outputs:
EG OUT: Envelope Control Voltage
KBD - KEYBOARD
Type: 13 keys (1 Octave); Low-Note Priority; Legato
     Triggering with Glide
Controllers:
GLIDE knob:    Time of Glide (Portamento) effect
Control Outputs:
KB CV OUT: Keyboard Control Voltage Output;
 3.7 Volts per Octave, nominal level
TRIG: Keyboard Trigger Output; 5 msec pulse;
     0 ~ +5 Volt signal
GATE: Keyboard Gate Output; 0 ~ +5 Volt signal
PATCHABLE HEADER
Control Voltage Inputs:
VCA IN: 0 to +5 Volt (VCA MODE switch set to ON)
     -2.5 to +2.5 Volt (VCA MODE switch set to EG)
 VCF IN: -5 to +5 Volt (Cutoff Frequency)
 VCO LIN IN: Linear Pitch Input; ± 2.5 Volt (Inverting control
     input)
 VCO EXP IN:   Exponential Pitch Input; -5 ~ +5 Volt,
 1V/Octave, trimmable
 LFO IN: -5 to +5 Volt
 (Negative CV slows LFO further than available
     on panel)
Audio Inputs:
VCF AUD IN: Filter Audio Input (Un-buffered/Un-mixed
     AC coupled)
Control Voltage Outputs:
KB CV OUT (x2): Nominal 0.3V/semitone from 1 octave key
 board
       (Note: Attenuate for 1 V/Octave)
 TRIG OUT (x2): 5 msec, 0 to +5 Volt pulse from keyboard
 GATE OUT (x2):    0V (off) to +5 Volt (on) gate signal from
 keyboard
 EG Output (x2):   ASD / AD type Envelope Generator, 0 to
 +5V signal
 LFO Output (x2):      -2.5 to +2.5 Volt Triangle or Square wave
       Shape selected by LFO WAVE switch
 VCF Output (x2): -2 to +2 Volt signal for audio or CV uses.
 VCO Output (x2): 0 to +5 Volt VCO signal;
       Shape selected by VCO WAVE switch
Audio Output:
1/4” Unbalanced Output; Nominal ± 1.5 Volt Signal
Power:
AC wall transformer
Output: +12 Volts DC; 1.2 Amperes; 2.1mm Center Pin
 Positive
Input:   100 to 240VAC, 50 to 60 Hz;
 Typical power consumption - 2 Watts
WARRANTY AND SERVICE INFO
LIMITED WARRANTY
Moog Music warrants that its products will be free from defects in materials
and workmanship, and shall conform to specifications current at the time
of shipment, for a period of one year from date of purchase. During the oneyear
period, any defective products will be repaired or replaced, at Moog
Music’s option, on a return-to-factory basis. This Warranty covers defects
that Moog Music determines are no fault of the user.
RETURNING YOUR WERKSTATT-Ø1 FOR REPLACEMENT/REPAIR
You must obtain prior approval and an RMA number from Moog Music before
returning any product to us. Wrap your Werkstatt-Ø1 carefully and pack
it with the power adapter in its original carton. The warranty will not be
honored if the product is not properly packed. Send it to Moog Music with
transportation and insurance charges paid. A reasonable cost for service,
materials and return freight will be charged to replace materials defective
through the fault of the user, or for which the one year warranty period
has expired.
Transportation and insurance charges from Moog Music to your United
States address, of products repaired or replaced under warranty will be
paid by Moog Music.
WARRANTY WARNING
Hacking or Modifying your Werkstatt in any way will naturally void your
warranty, as Moog Music cannot warrant parts and labor outside the original
configuration of the product.
In addition, please note that any changes or modifications made to this
product could void the user’s authority granted by the FCC to operate the
equipment. Moog Music Inc. does not recommend the modification of
this product.
Note: Specifications subject to change without notice.
Moog®, and Werkstatt-Ø1® are registered trademarks of Moog Music Inc.
©2014 Moog Music Inc
MOOG MUSIC INC. 160 Broadway St. Asheville, NC 28801
P: (828) 251-0090 E: info@moogmusic.com W: www.moogmusic.com
